docs: Roadmap, architecture, guarantees/tradeoffs (#2843)
paradedb/paradedb: docs/welcome/guarantees.mdx

---
title: Guarantees
---

### ACI(D)

All reads and writes go through Postgres’ transaction engine. This means that inserts, updates, and deletes to indexed columns are atomic, consistent, and respect Postgres' [isolation levels](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/transaction-iso.html).

Durability — the "D" in ACID — means that once a transaction is committed, its changes will survive crashes or failovers. In PostgreSQL, this guarantee is provided by the write-ahead log (WAL), which ensures that all changes are safely recorded before being applied to disk.

> [ParadeDB Community](https://github.com/paradedb/paradedb) does **not** write to the WAL, and therefore does not guarantee durability in the face of crashes. For production use cases that require full durability, [ParadeDB Enterprise](/deploy/enterprise) — a closed-source fork of ParadeDB for enterprise customers — includes full WAL integration.

Reviewer: Do we want to clarify here that in community the index won't disappear once fully written, though?

### Concurrency

ParadeDB is designed to support concurrent reads and writes in the same way that Postgres does — by adhering to Postgres' [multi-version

> concurrency control (MVCC)](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/7.1/mvcc.html) rules. We maintain an internal testing suite that rigorously measures the read and write throughput of the BM25

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
concurrency control (MVCC)](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/mvcc.html) rules. We maintain an internal testing suite that rigorously measures the read and write throughput of the BM25
```

probably shouldn't link to Postgres v7.1 docs.
